\input texinfo
@c This file is in the public domain and may be used freely.
@c
@c  @texinfofile{
@c    author = "Karl Berry",
@c    date = "5jul09",
@c    filename = "fontname.texi",
@c    email = "tex-fonts@math.utah.edu",
@c    url = "http://tug.org/fontname/",
@c    docstring = "A naming scheme for font files intended to be usable
@c                 with all systems on which TeX runs."
@c  }
@setfilename fontname.info
@settitle Filenames for @TeX{} fonts

@copying
This document is in the public domain and may be used freely.
@end copying

@c Define a new index for filenames, and use the concept index for everything.
@defcodeindex fl
@syncodeindex fl cp
@syncodeindex fn cp

@dircategory TeX
@direntry
* Naming TeX fonts: (fontname). Filenames for TeX fonts.
@end direntry


@titlepage
@title Fontname
@subtitle July 2009
@subtitle Filenames for @TeX{} fonts
@author Karl Berry
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Filenames for @TeX{} fonts

This is the Fontname document, a naming scheme for (the base part of)
external @TeX{} font filenames.  Last update 5@tie{}July@tie{}2009.

@menu
* Introduction::                Rationale and basic information about fonts.
* Filenames for fonts::         The construction of font names.
* Long names::                  A specification for long filenames.
* Font name lists::             Real fontnames for many existing fonts.
* Encodings::                   Specifications for various encodings.
* General index::               Index.

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Introduction

* History::
* References::

Filenames for fonts

* Suppliers::
* Typefaces::
* Weights::
* Variants::
* Widths::

Long names

* Name mapping file::           Aliases for fonts.
* Long naming scheme::          A way to use more than 8 alphanumerics.

Font name lists

* Standard PostScript fonts::   The standard 35 PostScript fonts.
* Adobe fonts::
* Apple fonts::
* Bitstream fonts::
* DTC fonts::
* ITC fonts::
* Linotype fonts::
* Monotype fonts::
* URW fonts::

Encodings

* 8a::                 Adobe standard.
* 8r::                 TeX base.
* dvips::              Dvips.
* ec::                 EC (aka Cork, TeX Latin 1, tex256).
* qx::                 QX, from GUST.
* t5::                 Vietnamese, from vntex.
* texmext::            TeX math extension.
* texmsym::            TeX math symbol.
* texmital::           TeX math italic.
* texnansi::           From Y&Y.
* texnansx::           From Y&Y.
* xl2::                OT1 + ISO Latin 2 (extended).
* xt2::                Typewriter version of xl2.

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@end ifnottex


@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@cindex introduction

This is Fontname, a naming scheme for (the base part of) external @TeX{}
font filenames.  This makes at most eight-character names from (almost)
arbitrarily complex font names, thus helping portability of @TeX{}
documents.  We point out some shortcomings of the scheme, and ways of
dealing with them.

@cindex bugs, reporting
@cindex reporting bugs
@flindex tex-fonts@@tug.org
Please send additions, corrections, or other comments to
@email{tex-fonts@@tug.org}.  Email
@email{tex-fonts-request@@tug.org} to join the list.

@cindex distribution
@cindex encoding files
@cindex mapping files
@cindex utilities
Besides this document, the Fontname distribution includes various
encoding files, mapping files, and utilities.  See the file
@file{README} for details.  You can retrieve the most up-to-date
version of these lists from @uref{http://tug.org/fontname}.  It is
also mirrored on all CTAN hosts in the directory
@file{tex-archive/doc/fontname}.  For a list of CTAN mirrors, see
@uref{http://www.ctan.org/tex-archive/CTAN.sites}.

This document is in the public domain and may be used freely.

@menu
* History::
* References::
@end menu


@node History
@section History

@cindex history

@cindex Mittelbach, Frank
@cindex Schoepf, Rainer
The original inspiration for Fontname was Frank Mittelbach and Rainer
Schoepf's article in @cite{TUGboat} 11(2) (June 1990), which led to my
article in @cite{TUGboat} 11(4) (November 1990), pages 512--519.
Mittelbach wrote another article criticizing the scheme below in
@cite{TUGboat} 13(1) (April 1992), pages 51--53; most of his points are
well-taken, but I saw no alternative then, and see no alternative now.
Others of his points are addressed in the appropriate sections below.

@cindex Fontname version 2
In August 1995, Fontname version 2 was released, concomitantly with a new
release of the PostScript fonts for use with La@TeX{} and Dvips. After
several years of experience, several modifications of the original
distribution seemed desirable: more precise specification of encodings
(@pxref{Variants}); machine-readable mapping files (the @file{*.map}
files in the distribution) and standardizing directory names as well as
font filenames (included in @file{supplier.map} and
@file{typeface.map}).

In Fontname version 1, some encoding variant characters (@samp{0},
@samp{2}, etc.) have been reassigned to a @samp{7} or @samp{8} sequence
(@pxref{Variants}).  Although this is an incompatible change, the
advantages of (1) consistency in naming encoding variants, and (2)
having some free variants makes it worthwhile.  Also, not so
coincidentally, new metrics for PostScript fonts in the Cork encoding
were issued---same encoding, different metrics. So a new name served a
practical purpose as well.

@cindex contributors
@cindex Beebe, Nelson
@cindex Beeton, Barbara
@cindex Bernstein, Rocky
@cindex Bouche, Thierry
@cindex Cugley, Damian
@cindex Horn, Berthol
@cindex Jeffrey, Alan
@cindex Lang, Russell
@cindex MacKay, Pierre
@cindex Rahtz, Sebastian
@cindex Rivlin, Jean
@cindex Rokicki, Tom
Many people have contributed to this work.  In particular, I gratefully
acknowledge Nelson Beebe, Barbara Beeton, Rocky Bernstein, Thierry Bouche,
Damian Cugley, Berthold K.P. Horn, Alan Jeffrey, Russell Lang, Pierre
MacKay, Sebastian Rahtz, Jean Rivlin, and Tom Rokicki.


@node References
@section References

@cindex references
@cindex related files

Related files and distributions:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@cindex @TeX{} Directory Structure standard
@cindex TDS standard
The @TeX{} Directory Structure (TDS) standard, available at
(@uref{http://tug.org/tds} and @file{@var{CTAN:}/tds}) specifies a
directory tree for all @TeX{} library files.  The directory names
given in @ref{Suppliers} and @ref{Typefaces} are intended to mesh with
that standard.

@item
@flindex modes.mf
The @file{modes.mf} file (@uref{ftp://tug.org/tex/modes.mf})
contains recommended mode names to use as directory names.

@item
@cindex Fontinst distribution
The Fontinst distribution (@url{http://tug.org/applications/fontinst}
supports quite general creation of virtual fonts, named according to the
scheme given here.

@item
@cindex Dvips translator
The Dvips translator (@url{http://tug.org/dvips}) supports resident
and downloadable PostScript fonts.  Dvips was the first place where
Fontname became widely known.  Dvips also includes Afm2tfm, another
program that can create virtual fonts.

@item
@cindex Dviljk translator
The Dviljk processor (included in @TeX{} Live) contains @TeX{} support
for the fonts built into the LaserJet@tie{}4.

@item
@cindex terminology
@cindex Southall, Richard
`Designing New Typefaces with Metafont', by Richard Southall,
Stanford Computer Science Department Technical Report STAN-CS-85-1074,
September 1985, for a comprehensive terminology of font design.

@end itemize


@node Filenames for fonts
@chapter Filenames for fonts

In this scheme, names may consist of only the letters (monocase a-z),
numerals (0-9), and underscore.  Having two names which differ only in
case is undesirable, since it results in clashes on common Windows
filesystems.

@cindex filenames, basics
Here is the basic scheme (the spaces here are merely for readability):

@example
 @var{S} @var{TT} @var{W} [@var{V@dots{}}] [@var{N}] [@var{E}] [@var{DD}]
@end example

@noindent where

@table @var
@item S
represents the supplier of the font.

@item TT
represents the typeface name.

@item W
represents the weight.

@item V@dots{}
represents the variant(s), and is omitted if both it and the width are
normal.  Many fonts have more than one variant.

@item N
represents the encoding, and is omitted if the encoding is nonstandard.
Encodings are subsumed in the section on variants (@pxref{Variants}).

@item E
represents the width (``expansion''), and is omitted if
it is normal.

@item DD
@cindex design size specification
@cindex hexadecimal design size
@cindex font scaling
@cindex Mittelbach, Frank
represents the design size (in decimal), and is omitted if the font is
linearly scaled.  Mittelbach in @cite{TUGboat} 13(1) proposes using
hexadecimal or base-36 notation.  In my opinion, the increased range
does not make up for the unreadability of the common sizes (e.g.,
10@dmn{pt} fonts would have a suffix @samp{a} (in hex), or @samp{j}
(in base 36)).

@end table

We used to try to limit font names to eight characters.  This was
never completely possible, and since DOS filesystems have become rare,
it's no longer an issue.

The weight, variants, and width are probably all best taken from the
original name of the font, instead of trying to relate them to some
external standard.

@menu
* Suppliers::
* Typefaces::
* Weights::
* Variants::
* Widths::
@end menu


@node Suppliers
@section Suppliers

@cindex suppliers
@cindex foundries
@cindex type foundries

The @dfn{supplier} is the source of a font, typically a (digital) type
foundry.

@cindex Avant Garde
@cindex Lubalin, Herb
You should use the supplier letter which matches the supplier you
obtained the font from, not the original source; for example, Avant
Garde was designed by Herb Lubalin for ITC, but Adobe also sells it.
The name of the font that you get from Adobe should start with @samp{p}.
This is because font resellers typically make modifications to the
original design.

Notes on specific suppliers:

@table @samp
@item f
@cindex individual font designers
@cindex small foundries
@cindex attribution of fonts, missing
@cindex unattributed fonts
For fonts that are distributed without any specific attribution to the
creator, by individuals, or by small foundries.  (Unfortunately, we
don't have enough characters to assign one to every font
supplier in the world.)

@item r
@cindex raw fonts
obsolete; specifies raw fonts, in the old distribution of Dvips.  New
fonts should never use @samp{r}. (The right thing to do is specify the
correct encoding, variant, or whatever the font's characteristics
actually are.)

@item z
@cindex bizarre font names
@cindex nonstandard names, escape for
@cindex escape for nonstandard names
for fonts that just don't fit well into the naming scheme.  The @samp{z}
should be followed by the real supplier letter.
@end table

@flindex supplier.map
Here is the table from the file @file{supplier.map}.  It is organized
alphabetically by abbreviation.  Each line consists of an abbreviation,
directory name, and comment.

@example
@include supplier.map
@end example


@node Typefaces
@section Typefaces

@cindex typefaces

For our purposes, a @dfn{typeface} is a collection of related fonts.

We sometimes use the same typeface abbreviation for fonts with different
supplier names, where we know (usually by inspection) that the fonts
truly are the same.  This helps conserve abbreviations.

Notes on specific typefaces:

@table @samp
@item ad
@itemx gm
@cindex Garamond, versions of
To explain a common confusion: @samp{ad} is Adobe Garamond (with a
@samp{FontName} of @samp{AGaramond}). This is quite different from the
@samp{Garamond} typeface distributed by Adobe, which is actually ITC
Garamond.  (Garamond No.@: 3 (@samp{f3}), Simoncini Garamond
(@samp{ig}), and Stempel Garamond (@samp{eg}) are still other
variations on the Garamond theme.)

@item lh
@itemx ls
@itemx lx
@itemx r1
These abbreviations for Lucida typeface subfamilies, et al., solve a
problem with names getting too long, or help conserve variant
abbreviations.  @xref{Variants}.  Ideally, they would not exist.

@item ns
@itemx nt
@itemx tm
Suppliers offer as many variations on the Times New Roman design as they
do Garamond.  Adobe has @samp{Times}, @samp{TimesNewRoman}, and
@samp{TimesNewRomanPS}.  Although this last has been used by other
foundries (e.g., Monotype) for a Times variation exactly compatible with
Adobe's @samp{Times}, Adobe itself also offers it, so we must have
abbreviations for all three.

@item pi
@cindex pi fonts
For pi fonts. Since names of pi fonts are rather arbitrary, it is
not useful to try to assign typeface abbreviations to all of
them. Instead, we use the supplier letter, @samp{pi}, an
arbitarily-assigned three-digit number, a weight and (if necessary) a
variant. For example, @samp{mpi001r}.  Pi font @samp{001} for one
supplier has nothing to do with pi font @samp{001} for another.
@end table

@flindex typeface.map
@findex FontName
Here is the table, from the file @file{typeface.map}.  It is organized
alphabetically by abbreviation.  Each line consists of an abbreviation
and directory name, possibly followed by PostScript @samp{FontName}s
and/or a comment in roman.  The @samp{FontName} may be preceded by a
letter @var{s} and a @samp{:}, as in @samp{b:Dutch}.  In that case, the
@var{s} is a supplier abbreviation, and we've used that abbreviation for
the given @samp{FontName} from that supplier.

@verbatiminclude typeface.map

@node Weights
@section Weights

@cindex weight

The @dfn{weight} of a font specifies its boldness.  Arranged from
lightest to heaviest (more or less):

@display
hairline, extra light, light
book, regular, medium
demibold, semibold, bold, extra bold, heavy
black, ultra, poster
@end display

@flindex weight.map
Here is the table, from the file @file{weight.map}.  It is organized
alphabetically by abbreviation.  Each line consists of an abbreviation
and any parts of a PostScript @samp{FontName} which use that
abbreviation.

@example
@include weight.map
@end example


@node Variants
@section Variants

@cindex variants

@dfn{Variants} include typeface variations (e.g., italic, sans serif),
and font encodings (e.g., Adobe standard, @TeX{} text).

@cindex multiple variants
A fontname may require multiple variants.  To resolve the worst
ambiguities, we specify that any encoding variant (@samp{7}, @samp{8},
or @samp{9}, see below) come last and any other numeral variant come
first (to avoid confusion with a design size).  We recommend but do not
require that the other variants be given in alphabetical order.  (It's
not required because it's too painful to implement the sorting in
@TeX{}, and many existing names already have non-alphabetized variants.)

@cindex letterspacing
@cindex small caps fonts
The letterspacing possibilities introduced by @code{fontinst} and
virtual fonts have not yet become sufficiently widespread to make
standardization beneficial.  Likewise for the many possible ways to
generate small caps fonts.

Notes on specific variants, both old and new:

@table @samp
@item 1
@itemx 4
@itemx 6
@itemx b
@cindex semisans variant
@cindex semiserif variant
@cindex fax variant
@cindex bright variant
These variants (`semisans', `bright', `semiserif', and `fax') were used
only for single typefaces, so to conserve variant abbreviations, they
now have typeface abbreviations instead.  Also, for @samp{b}, to avoid
too-long names; and for the others, to avoid variant vs.@: design-size
ambiguities.

@item g
@itemx h
Since these variants were not actually used in any font names, they are
now obsolete and may be reassigned in the future.

@item 5
@itemx 6
@itemx 7
@itemx 8
@itemx 9
@cindex phonetic encodings
@cindex Cyrillic encodings
@cindex 7-bit encodings
@cindex 8-bit encodings
@cindex expertised encodings
@findex SuperFont
@findex 9s @r{variant}
These characters begin a two-character @dfn{encoding variant}.
Generally, @samp{7} is for 7-bit encodings, @samp{8} is for 8-bit
encodings, and @samp{9} is for expertised encodings with or without
oldstyle digits (see the @samp{x} item below), but this is not an
absolute rule. Also, @samp{5} is presently used for phonetic encodings
and @samp{6} for Cyrillic encodings.  The @samp{9s} (@samp{SuperFont})
variant contain all of Adobe, Latin 1, and Expert glyphs, perhaps with
slightly different metrics than the original fonts.

@cindex ligatures and encodings
@findex Lslash
@findex lslash
@flindex T1.etx
For a font to be named with a certain encoding variant, it's not
necessary that all the characters appear in precisely the same positions
as in the encoding definition.  It's enough that the usual @TeX{} macros
work. In practice, this means that it's ok for a font to be labelled
@samp{7t} if the only difference from Computer Modern is that the
ligatures and the @samp{lslash} and @samp{Lslash} characters are
different, since it's impossible to access or change the ligature table
from @TeX{}.  Standard PostScript fonts don't have an @samp{lslash}
character the way Computer Modern does, but they do have the
@samp{Lslash} and @samp{lslash} characters themselves, so the usual
@TeX{} @code{\lslash} and @code{\Lslash} macros can be made to work via
ligatures.  See the file @file{T1.etx} file in the @code{fontinst}
distribution for details.

@cindex encodings, unspecified
@cindex Afm2tfm encoding
@cindex LaserJet 4 fonts
If a name does not contain a specific encoding variant, its encoding is
unspecified.  For example, some of the fonts distributed with Dvips(k)
have names like @samp{ptmr} for @samp{Times-Roman}; they use the Dvips
encoding (@pxref{dvips}), which is close to (but not the same
as) the @TeX{} text encoding (as in Computer Modern Roman).  Similarly,
the TFM files distributed with Dvilj(k) for the builtin LaserJet 4 fonts
have names like @samp{cunm}, since these fonts, while compatible with
@TeX{} text, contain many additional characters.

@item 9
These items are needed only because @samp{x} (and possibly @samp{j})
followed by a two-character regular variant makes some names too long.
That is, @samp{9t} is equivalent in meaning to @samp{x7t}, and @samp{9d}
is equivalent to @samp{jx7t}.  (This may not be true for all
@samp{9@var{x}} encodings, though.)

@item k
@itemx z
@cindex scripts
@cindex Greek fonts
@cindex Cyrillic fonts
These variants (indicating Greek and Cyrillic fonts, respectively) are
obsolete; future fonts in different scripts should be assigned an
appropriate encoding abbreviation.  These are not currently
standardized, due to ignorance of the appropriate encodings.  Please
send suggestions for abbreviations to the address in @ref{Introduction}.

@item m
@itemx v
@itemx y
@cindex math variants
These math-related variants remain for the sake of typeface-specific
math encodings, e.g., Lucida.  Fonts that use the Computer Modern math
encodings should use @samp{7m} (@pxref{texmital}), @samp{7v}
(@pxref{texmext}), and @samp{7y} (@pxref{texmsym}).

@item n
@cindex informal variant
@cindex schoolbook variant
@cindex Stone Informal
This is used for several different (but very rare) variants: only the
Stone typeface has an ``informal'' variant, and only a few Monotype
fonts have a ``schoolbook'' variant, with different `a', `g', and `y'
shapes.

@item r
Included only if no other variants, including encodings, apply, and
either the width (@pxref{Widths}) is not @samp{r} or a design size is
present.  I.e., @samp{r} is only used as a placeholder.  When the normal
version of the typeface is sans serif (e.g., Helvetica), @samp{r} should
be used when necessary, not @samp{s}.  Use @samp{s} only when the
typeface family has both serif and sans serif variants.

@item s
@itemx t
@cindex typewriter variant
@cindex sans variant
@cindex Mittelbach, Frank
Mittelbach in @cite{TUGboat} 13(1) suggests that these variants (for
`sans' and `typewriter') should be identified as part of the typeface
name, because there are few typeface families with these variants.  I
feel that since they are logically variants, it's best to name them that
way.  But @samp{LucidaSans} (@pxref{Typefaces}) and a few others are
exceptions, to avoid too-long names.

@item x
@itemx 8x
@itemx 9?
@cindex expert encoding
@cindex expertised font
@samp{8x} indicates a font in the @samp{Expert} encoding itself.
@samp{x} indicates an @dfn{expertised} font, i.e., a composite (virtual)
font that includes characters from an @samp{8x} font.  And in fact an
@samp{x@var{ee}} sequence is replaced by @samp{9@var{e}}, to save
characters.
@end table

@flindex variant.map
Fontname 1 assignments are shown in brackets in the following table,
from the file @file{variant.map}.  It is organized alphabetically by
abbreviation.  Each line consists of an abbreviation and either any
parts of a PostScript @samp{FontName} which use that abbreviation or the
PostScript @samp{Encoding} name.

@example
@include variant.map
@end example


@node Widths
@section Widths

@cindex widths
@cindex compression
@cindex expansion

The @dfn{width} of a font specifies the compression or expansion of the
font.  Arranged from narrowest to widest (more or less):

@display
ultra compressed, extra condensed, compressed, condensed, narrow
regular
semiextended, extended, expanded, wide
@end display

@cindex automatic expansion
@cindex character scaling, automatic
Expansion or compression of fonts is sometimes done automatically (as by
the PostScript @code{scale} operator), and sometimes done by humans.  In
the latter case, the human will also presumably choose a font name which
includes `Extended' or `Expanded' or `Condensed' or `Narrow' or whatever
according to their own preferences; the abbreviation can follow along.
When creating a new synthetically expanded or compressed font for use
with @TeX{}, e.g., with Afm2tfm or @code{fontinst}, use @samp{n} and
@samp{e}.

@flindex width.map
Here is the table, from the file @file{width.map}.  It is organized
alphabetically by abbreviation.  Each line consists of an abbreviation
and any parts of a PostScript @samp{FontName} which use that
abbreviation.

@example
@include width.map
@end example


@node Long names
@chapter Long names

@cindex long names

Eight characters is not enough to unambiguously represent all fonts.  To
do that, we have to allow ourselves arbitrarily long names.  Although we
certainly cannot use such names for the files themselves, we could still
use them in @TeX{} documents given a simple mapping file, as discussed
below.

@menu
* Name mapping file::           Aliases for fonts.
* Long naming scheme::          A way to use more than 8 alphanumerics.
@end menu


@node Name mapping file
@section A fontname mapping file

@cindex fontname mapping file
@cindex mapping file

At the moment, most implementations of @TeX{} look up a TFM file (as
part of the @code{\font} command), by searching for a file with the name
given by the user (possibly in any of series of directories).  But if we
also looked TFM names up in @emph{another} file (or set of files), which
specifies the actual filename, the fontname given in the @TeX{} source
file could be almost anything at all, of any length.

@flindex texfonts.map
In version 5.851d of Web2c, I implemented this mapping file.  Each file
@file{texfonts.map} in a search path is read for abbreviations. The file
has a straightforward format: each line specifies the filename and the
@TeX{} name for one font, separated by whitespace.  Extra information on
the line is ignored; then more information could be specified for the
benefit of DVI-reading programs in the same file.  Comments start with
@code{%} and continue to the end of the line.

Besides allowing long names, this sort of mapping file has other
benefits.  @TeX{} source or DVI files can be more easily transported,
because the font names in a particular file can be made to work on every
system.  Also, when combined with a consistent naming scheme, macros
could be written to access any of a number of fonts.  Right now, each
font family has to have specialized macros written to deal with it.

@cindex Knuth, Donald E.
Incidentally, Professor Knuth has approved this as a legitimate
``system-dependent'' extension; a @TeX{} with such a feature can still
be called ``@TeX{}''.


@node Long naming scheme
@section A naming scheme for long names

@cindex long naming scheme

@cindex X Window System font names
Once we allow ourselves long names, we can construct a naming scheme
to handle arbitrary fonts without much difficulty.  Here is one
proposal, based on the X Window System font naming conventions.

@example
@var{supplier}-@var{family}-@var{weight}-@var{variants}-@var{width}-@var{encoding}--@var{size}
@end example

@var{supplier} is the usual @code{Adobe}, @code{Autologic}, etc., as
well as @code{unknown} or @code{bizarre}---this last meaning the rest of
the name is nonstandard.  If the @var{supplier} is missing, i.e., the
name starts with a @code{-}, ``public domain'' is assumed.  For fonts
made by individuals, the initials of the designer would probably make a
good @var{supplier}.

@var{family} is @code{ComputerModern} or @code{Times} or whatever.

Everything else is optional.  The @code{--} before the @var{size} lets
one specify a name with, say, a weight and variants, but then skip the
@var{width} and @var{encoding}, but still be able to
give a size.

@var{weight} and @var{width} are as described earlier.

If there is more than one variant, they are separated with some
character other than @samp{-}, say @samp{=}:
@example
B+H-Lucida-Bold-Sans=Typewriter--10
@end example

@findex font_coding_scheme
@var{encoding} is what Metafont calls the
@code{font_coding_scheme}---the layout of the characters in the font.
For example, @samp{Cork} or @samp{ISOLatin1} or @samp{AdobeAlternate}.

@cindex category codes
Names are case-sensitive, for consistency with the rest of @TeX{} and
with PostScript, etc.  Spaces cannot be used in the name, to make it
easier for @TeX{} to parse.  Likewise, characters with default category
codes other than 11 (letter) or 12 (other) should not be used.

Another possibility is to forget all the above, and simply use the
vendor's name (perhaps prefixed by the vendor):
@samp{Times-Roman}.


@node Font name lists
@appendix Font name lists

These sections contain a list of fonts from various suppliers together
with the corresponding names.

@menu
* Standard PostScript fonts::   The standard 35 PostScript fonts.
* Adobe fonts::
* Apple fonts::
* Bitstream fonts::
* DTC fonts::
* ITC fonts::
* Linotype fonts::
* Monotype fonts::
* URW fonts::
@end menu


@node Standard PostScript fonts
@section Standard PostScript fonts

@cindex 35 standard PostScript fonts
@cindex standard PostScript fonts
@cindex PostScript fonts, standard

Abbreviated names for the 35 standard PostScript fonts. An encoding
variant, such as @samp{8a} for the Adobe @samp{StandardEncoding}, is
omitted.

@table @file
@item pagk
 @samp{AvantGarde-Book}
@item pagko
 @samp{AvantGarde-BookOblique}
@item pagd
 @samp{AvantGarde-Demi}
@item pagdo
 @samp{AvantGarde-DemiOblique}
@item pbkd
 @samp{Bookman-Demi}
@item pbkdi
 @samp{Bookman-DemiItalic}
@item pbkl
 @samp{Bookman-Light}
@item pbkli
 @samp{Bookman-LightItalic}
@item pcrb
 @samp{Courier-Bold}
@item pcrbo
 @samp{Courier-BoldOblique}
@item pcrr
 @samp{Courier}
@item pcrro
 @samp{Courier-Oblique}
@item phvb
 @samp{Helvetica-Bold}
@item phvbo
 @samp{Helvetica-BoldOblique}
@item phvbrn
 @samp{Helvetica-NarrowBold}
@item phvbon
 @samp{Helvetica-NarrowBoldOblique}
@item phvr
 @samp{Helvetica}
@item phvro
 @samp{Helvetica-Oblique}
@item phvrrn
 @samp{Helvetica-Narrow}
@item phvron
 @samp{Helvetica-NarrowOblique}
@item pncb
 @samp{NewCenturySchlbk-Bold}
@item pncbi
 @samp{NewCenturySchlbk-BoldItalic}
@item pncri
 @samp{NewCenturySchlbk-Italic}
@item pncr
 @samp{NewCenturySchlbk-Roman}
@item pplb
 @samp{Palatino-Bold}
@item pplbi
 @samp{Palatino-BoldItalic}
@item pplri
 @samp{Palatino-Italic}
@item pplr
 @samp{Palatino-Roman}
@item psyr
 @samp{Symbol}
@item ptmb
 @samp{Times-Bold}
@item ptmbi
 @samp{Times-BoldItalic}
@item ptmri
 @samp{Times-Italic}
@item ptmr
 @samp{Times-Roman}
@item pzcmi
 @samp{ZapfChancery-MediumItalic}
@item pzdr
 @samp{ZapfDingbats}
@end table


@node Adobe fonts
@section Adobe fonts

@flindex adobe.map
The @file{adobe.map} file has abbreviations for Adobe fonts.

@example
@include adobe.map
@end example


@node Apple fonts
@section Apple fonts

@flindex apple.map
The @file{apple.map} file has abbreviations for Apple fonts.

@example
@include apple.map
@end example


@node Bitstream fonts
@section Bitstream fonts

@flindex bitstrea.map
The @file{bitstrea.map} file has abbreviations for Bitstream fonts.

@example
@include bitstrea.map
@end example


@node DTC fonts
@section DTC fonts

@flindex dtc.map
The @file{dtc.map} file has abbreviations for DTC (Digital Typeface
Corporation) fonts.

@example
@include dtc.map
@end example


@node ITC fonts
@section ITC fonts

@flindex itc.map
The @file{itc.map} file has abbreviations for ITC (International
Typeface Corporation) fonts.

@example
@include itc.map
@end example


@node Linotype fonts
@section Linotype fonts

@flindex linotype.map
The @file{linotype.map} file has abbreviations for Linotype fonts.

@example
@include linotype.map
@end example


@node Monotype fonts
@section Monotype fonts

@flindex monotype.map
The @file{monotype.map} file has abbreviations for Monotype fonts.

@example
@iftex
@ifclear html
@global@hfuzz@maxdimen
@end ifclear
@end iftex
@include monotype.map
@iftex
@ifclear html
@global@hfuzz1pt
@end ifclear
@end iftex
@end example


@node URW fonts
@section URW fonts

@cindex URW fonts
@cindex Ertner, Vincent

Information graciously supplied through URW, via Vincent Ertner: Each
URW font has an assigned font number.  The last character describes
the size or purpose of the font, as the design of the font is
optimized accordingly:

@table @code
@item X000000E
Extreme: 8@dmn{pt} and smaller

@item X000000T
Text: between 8 and 18@dmn{pt}

@item X000000D 
Display: 18@dmn{pt} and larger

@item X000000P
Poster: 48@dmn{pt} and larger

@item X000000M 
Monospaced / Typewriter

@item X000000L
LaserWriter / PostScript / Adobe compatible

@item X000000I
Intellifont PCL (5) compatible

@end table
@noindent An @samp{F} identifier is not known.

@flindex urw.map
The @file{urw.map} file has abbreviations for URW fonts.

@example
@include urw.map
@end example


@node Encodings
@appendix Encodings

@cindex PostScript encoding vectors
@cindex encoding vectors

The following sections define various encodings as PostScript encoding
vectors.  These files can be installed in the Dvips header directory and
then used in @file{psfonts.map} to change font encodings of downloadable
or builtin fonts (@pxref{psfonts.map,,, dvips, Dvips}).

You can also specify these @file{.enc} files to Afm2tfm when building a
font (@pxref{Changing font encodings,,, dvips, Dvips}).

For a discussion of @TeX{} font encodings in general, and defining new
ones for use with @command{fontinst} in particular, see
@uref{http://www.ctan.org/tex-archive/fonts/utilities/fontinst/doc/encspecs}.

A tutorial on character code issues in general is available at
@url{http://www.cs.tut.fi/~jkorpela/chars.html}.

Naming specific characters is a tangled and difficult area.  Here are
some links to character tables for Unicode, Adobe, and WGL4, for your
researching pleasure (thanks to Boguslaw Jackowski for the list):

@itemize @bullet
@item @uref{http://www.unicode.org/Public/UNIDATA/UnicodeData.txt}
@item @uref{http://www.unicode.org/Public/UNIDATA/NamesList.txt}
@item @uref{http://partners.adobe.com/asn/tech/type/corporateuse-old.txt}
@item @uref{http://partners.adobe.com/asn/tech/type/aglfn13.txt}
@item @uref{http://partners.adobe.com/asn/tech/type/unicodegn.jsp}
@item @uref{http://www.microsoft.com/OpenType/otspec/WGL4.htm}
@end itemize

@menu
* 6w::                 CP-1251 (Cyrillic).
* 8a::                 Adobe standard.
* 8r::                 TeX base.
* dvips::              Dvips.
* ec::                 EC (aka COrk, TeX Latin 1, tex256).
* groff::              8g.
* t5::                 Vietnamese, from vntex.
* qx::                 QX, from GUST.
* texmext::            TeX math extension.
* texmsym::            TeX math symbol.
* texmital::           TeX math italic.
* texnansi::           From Y&Y.
* texnansx::           From Y&Y.
* xl2::                OT1 + ISO Latin 2 (extended).
* xt2::                Typewriter version of xl2.
@end menu


@node 6w
@section @samp{6w.enc}: Cyrillic CP-1251

@flindex 62.enc
@cindex Cyrillic encoding
@cindex CP-1251 encoding
@cindex encodings, Cyrillic CP-1251

@verbatiminclude 8a.enc


@node 8a
@section @samp{8a.enc}: Adobe standard encoding

@flindex 8a.enc
@cindex Adobe standard encoding
@cindex encodings, Adobe standard

@verbatiminclude 8a.enc


@node 8r
@section @samp{8r.enc}: @TeX{} base encoding

@flindex 8r.enc
@cindex @TeX{} base encoding
@cindex base encoding, for @TeX{}
@cindex encodings, @TeX{} base
@cindex Windows ANSI
@cindex Lucida Bright

@verbatiminclude 8r.enc

@node dvips
@section @samp{dvips.enc}: Dvips encoding

@flindex dvips.enc
@cindex Dvips encoding
@cindex encoding, Dvips

@verbatiminclude dvips.enc


@node ec
@section @samp{ec.enc}: Cork encoding

@flindex ec.enc
@cindex Cork encoding
@cindex EC encoding
@cindex @TeX{} Latin 1 encoding
@cindex encodings, Cork
@cindex encodings, EC
@cindex encodings, @TeX{} Latin 1

@verbatiminclude ec.enc


@node groff
@section @samp{groff.enc}: groff encoding

@flindex groff.enc
@cindex Groff encoding
@cindex encoding, Groff

@verbatiminclude groff.enc


@node t5
@section @samp{t5.enc}: T5 encoding

@flindex t5.enc
@cindex T5 encoding
@cindex Vietnamese encoding
@cindex encoding, T5

@verbatiminclude t5.enc


@node qx
@section @samp{qx.enc}

@flindex qx.enc
@cindex encodings, qx
@cindex qx encoding

From GUST.

@verbatiminclude qx.txt
@verbatiminclude qx.enc


@node texmext
@section @samp{texmext.enc}: @TeX{} math extension encoding

@flindex texmext.enc
@cindex @TeX{} math extension encoding
@cindex math extension, @TeX{} encoding
@cindex extension, @TeX{} math encoding
@cindex encodings, @TeX{} math symbol

@verbatiminclude texmext.enc


@node texmsym
@section @samp{texmsym.enc}: @TeX{} math symbol encoding

@flindex texmsym.enc
@cindex @TeX{} math symbol encoding
@cindex math symbol, @TeX{} encoding
@cindex symbol, @TeX{} math encoding
@cindex encodings, @TeX{} math symbol

@verbatiminclude texmsym.enc


@node texmital
@section @samp{texmital.enc}: @TeX{} math italic encoding

@flindex texmital.enc
@cindex @TeX{} math italic encoding
@cindex math italic, @TeX{} encoding
@cindex italic, @TeX{} math encoding
@cindex encodings, @TeX{} math italic

@verbatiminclude texmital.enc


@node texnansi
@section @samp{texnansi.enc}

@flindex texnansi.enc
@cindex encodings, texnansi
@cindex texnansi encoding

From Y&Y.

@verbatiminclude texnansi.enc


@node texnansx
@section @samp{texnansx.enc}

@flindex texnansx.enc
@cindex encodings, texnansx
@cindex texnansx encoding

From Y&Y.  @samp{texnansi} without repeats.

@verbatiminclude texnansx.enc


@node xl2
@section @samp{xl2.enc}: OT1 + ISO Latin 2 extended

@flindex xl2.enc
@cindex ISO Latin 2 extended, @TeX{} encoding

@verbatiminclude xl2.enc


@node xt2
@section @samp{xt2.enc}: typewriter OT1 + ISO Latin 2 extended

@flindex xt2.enc
@cindex ISO Latin 2 extended and typewriter, @TeX{} encoding

@verbatiminclude xt2.enc


@node General index
@unnumbered General index

@printindex cp


@bye
